Hi, this is Matt Baker. About a year ago, we posted a video called
37 Bible Characters Found Through Archaeology. In that video, I emphasized the fact that
all 37 of those people, indicated here with a verification checkmark, lived during the
Iron Age or later. This is because the Bible is basically an Iron Age book, meaning that
it was during the Iron Age that the Bible started to be written.
To put it another way, by the time the biblical authors put ink to parchment, the Bronze Age
was already a distant memory and therefore they had to rely on a lot of guesswork, mixed
with imagination, to come up with stories from earlier times. Which is why Genesis and
Exodus read more like myth and legend than, say, 2 Kings, which includes a lot of historical
details that nicely line up with what we know from other sources.
Now, while critical scholars are all basically in agreement about all of this, there are
still some people from certain religious circles who continue to believe that the Bible is
100% literal history. These people sometimes cite certain archaeological finds as evidence
for biblical characters from the Bronze Age. Therefore, in today's video, I'm going
to take a look at some of these claims and I'm going to do so with the help of Religion
for Breakfast, Tablets and Temples, Dig It With Raven, Al-Muqaddimah, and Digital Hammurabi.
But before we jump into it, I want to tell you about a shortcast that I've been listening
to on Blinkist. A shortcast is simply a short podcast and Blinkist has lots of them. As
you might know, Blinkist is a website and app that provides you with the main ideas
of over 6,500 books, which you can either read or listen to, usually in less than 30
minutes, and sometimes in even less than 15. I often check out a book on Blinkist before
making a decision on whether or not I want to purchase and read the whole book. Well,
Blinkist also has shortcasts, such as Dan Snow's History Hit. I recently listened
to this episode, entitled Archaeology, Discoveries, and Historical Biases. In fact, it helped
me in preparing this video and I think you'd like it too. So if you'd like to get a 7-day
free trial and 40% off Blinkist's annual premium, just click the link in the description
or pinned comment. Or you can scan the QR code on screen right now.
Alright, back to the Bronze Age. Let's begin by taking a closer look at where the division
between the Bronze Age and the Iron Age occurs on our Biblical family tree chart. Basically,
the dividing line would look something like this. So, characters such as the Three Patriarchs,
as well as Moses, all belong in the Bronze Age, whereas characters like Devorah, Ruth,
David, and Samuel belong in the Early Iron Age.
As mentioned in our previous video, the earliest Israelite leader for whom we have a contemporary
extra-biblical source for is Omri. We do have an earlier mention of David outside of the
Bible but it's not actually from a contemporary source as it only mentions him as being the
ancestor of a later king. So if we want a contemporary source, then no, we don't actually
have anything for David. However, when it comes to non-Israelites mentioned by name
in the Bible, we do have someone even earlier than Omri and that is Shoshenq I. Being that
he was a pharaoh of Egypt, we have lots of contemporary extra-biblical sources for him.
Okay, so the goal of this video is to see if we can get a verification checkmark for
anyone even earlier than Shoshenq and in particular, someone on the Bronze Age side of this big
blue line. So let's start with who I think is the best possible candidate for making
this happen. He's not actually shown on this family tree chart but if he was, he'd
be placed somewhere here as a contemporary of Moses. I'll let Dr. Andrew Mark Henry
from Religion for Breakfast explain more.
Balaam son of Beor is one of the more mysterious figures in the Bible, a non-Israelite prophet
who does the bidding of the God of Israel, only to be later cast as a villain and killed
by the Israelites. He appears in the book of Numbers chapter 22. The Israelites are
nearing the end of their 40-year wander through the wilderness after escaping from Egypt and
they're camped on the plains of Moab, just northeast of the Dead Sea in modern-day Jordan.
And the Moabites are understandably alarmed. The Israelites have just destroyed a few of
their neighbors and the Moabites are afraid that they're next. So the king of Moab decides
to hire Balaam, who was famous for his very effective blessings and curses. Maybe with
some supernatural help, with Balaam cursing the Israelites, the Moabites can properly
defend themselves. While Balaam journeys to Moab on a donkey, God grows angry with him
and sends an angel to block his path. The donkey can see the angel, Balaam can't, and
while Balaam is striking the donkey trying to get it to move, the donkey starts talking
and is like, hey, why are you doing this to me? Finally, Balaam sees the angel of the
Lord who says, you can go to the Moabites, but speak only what I tell you to speak. And
so when Balaam arrives, instead of cursing the Israelites, he blesses them in a series
of four poetic oracles. Now up until the 1960s, that's basically all we knew about Balaam,
along with a few other passing references in the Bible. But in 1967, archaeologists
discovered an inscription on a few pieces of plaster at an archaeological site called
Deir Allah. The Deir Allah inscription dates to around 800 BCE, and it's written in a Canaanite
dialect with some similarities with Aramaic. It starts,
This is the book of Balaam, son of Beor, a seer of the gods. The gods came to him at
night, and he beheld a vision in accordance with El's utterance.
So here we have an extra biblical reference to a seer named Balaam. Critical scholars
agree that this is referencing the same character that we see in Numbers. The text describes
the chief god of the Canaanite pantheon, El, coming to him with a message of disaster.
The gods have banded together. The Shaddai gods have established a council, and they
have said to the god of Shagar, So up, close up the heavens with a dense cloud. That darkness
exists there, not brilliance. So Balaam learns of a plan from the Shaddain, some sort of
divine council of gods who oppose the chief god El, and they're planning to blanket the
land in darkness. The text, as you can see, is very fragmentary, but it seems that Balaam
successfully averts the Shaddain's plan. The story in Numbers and the Deir Allah inscription
demonstrate that Balaam was a known character in the region east of the Jordan River. Now,
some scholars think he was a historical figure, some sort of wandering prophet for hire, but
at the very least, this is evidence of a shared tradition in the region about a heavily mythologized
celebrity prophet. When we compare this inscription with the Book of Numbers, we can see how Israelite
religion was embedded in the local cultural context and has affinities with other religious
traditions in the region. In the Deir Allah inscription, Balaam is a prophet for the chief
god El, and in several instances in his oracles in the Book of Numbers, he refers to the god
of Israel as El. We see something similar with the council of gods in the Deir Allah
inscription called the Shaddain. Shaddain is a plural form of the word Shaddai, which
appears in Balaam's oracles referencing the Israelite god, the oracle of Balaam who hears
the words of El, who sees the vision of the Shaddai, usually translated as God and the
Almighty respectively. And narratively speaking, scholars have pointed out similarities between
the story in Numbers and the inscription. Both include poetic oracles, and both include
the plot point of having a vision at night that's then reported the next morning. Scholars
argue that this means the story in Numbers knows what a Balaam story should sound like.
In other words, if Balaam is a stock character in the local folklore, then it would have
been a literary convention to include a nocturnal vision. So scholars generally agree that the
Deir Allah inscription, and at least parts of the story in Numbers, derive from the same
cultural context, though repackaged for different audiences. Now, none of this proves the historicity
of the story in Numbers. The Deir Allah inscription dates to the Iron Age, around 800 BCE. The
Book of Numbers describes a narrative that claims to be situated in the Late Bronze Age,
maybe around the 15th century BCE. But Numbers itself, the book, was composed centuries later,
also during the Iron Age. So we're talking a span of hundreds of years between the supposed
events of Numbers 22 and the date of composition of both the Deir Allah inscription and Numbers
22. It's more likely that both of these texts are drawing on a local tradition about
Balaam that was circulating east of the Jordan River in the 9th to 7th centuries BCE. The
story in Numbers also seems to reflect the political reality of the Iron Age, when the
Kingdom of Moab was a frequent rival of the Israelite kingdoms.
So as Dr. Henry explained, it is possible that Balaam was in fact a real historical
person. However, the extra-biblical source we have for him comes from the Iron Age, not
the Bronze Age. So in other words, it's not a contemporary source. Or it could be
that Balaam actually lived in the Iron Age and that the biblical authors simply placed
him further back in time. Either way, we can't give Balaam the same kind of verification
that we can give to Shashank or Omri. Balaam's verification would be more at the level of
David. Regardless, the Deir Allah inscription is an amazing find and does at least open
the possibility that the Bible contains a reference to a real Bronze Age person who
was important enough in the region that his name was remembered centuries later.
Let's now take a look at the most important biblical figure from the Bronze Age – Moses.
Is there any evidence in the archaeological record of him? Well, there's one particular
inscription that some argue does in fact mention Moses. I'm going to let PhD candidate Lachlan
Davis from the up-and-coming YouTube channel Tablets and Temples tell you more.
This is the Sinai 361 inscription, one of several carved inscriptions discovered near
an ancient mining site on the Sinai Peninsula. Bold claims have been made that these texts
contain the name Moses as well as descriptions of events from the Exodus, such as Moses performing
miracles and creating a bronze serpent statue. The inscriptions date to the 2nd millennium
BCE and are written in Proto-Sinaitic, the oldest known alphabetic script from which the Phoenician
and Paleo-Hebrew alphabet is descended. So are these writings evidence for Moses and the Exodus?
One such advocate is Dr. Douglas Petrovich who translates the inscription as follows,
Our bound servitude has lingered. Moses then provoked astonishment. It is a year of
astonishment because of the lady. Such a reading evokes images of slavery and miracles performed
by Moses in the book of Exodus. Another translation by Professor Kramalkov reads,
This is the site of where stood the snake of bronze that Mashae, meaning Moses, Mahub-Baalt made.
He argues this is a reference to the bronze serpent Moses created in the book of Numbers.
While these sensational claims are exciting, the reality is these translations have been
heavily criticized and the texts likely don't say Moses at all. The Hebrew name Moses comes
from the Egyptian word Messi, meaning to give birth, and has S as its middle letter. However,
translators who found Moses in the Sinai inscriptions have mistaken a letter for the
Phoenician s sound when it is actually a Sinaitic th letter, as in thin. So if the word is a name,
it's probably math, which means twin in Ugaritic. The scholar Dr. Aaron Wilson-Wright has demonstrated
that these sensational Moses translations rely on restoring words that aren't in the inscription
and inventing new meanings for other words. So she proposes the following translation,
O returner, those who tell people about math are beloved of the lady. The lady is the Egyptian
goddess Hathor. This is a common expression among the Sinai inscriptions. Another text, Sinai 351
reads, Beloved of the lady are those who tell people about math, the miner and extractor.
And still another 349 calls math the chief of miners. It appears these inscriptions commemorate
a mining official, possibly named math, and offer blessings from Hathor. The texts make no reference
to Moses, snakes, or miracles, but they are a fascinating example of writing in the world's
oldest alphabet and scholars are continuing to work on deciphering them. Okay, so maybe those
inscriptions don't refer to Moses, but there's lots of other evidence for the Exodus, right?
Well, no. In recent years, several popular documentaries have come out which claim to go
through lots of evidence for the Exodus, but in each case, the evidence presented is extremely
flimsy and has not been verified by any actual experts. So for this topic, I'm going to let a
real archaeologist, Raven De Silva from the channel Dig It with Raven, explain further.
She has a new book coming out called The Other Ancient Civilizations,
decoding archaeology's less celebrated cultures, which I'll leave a link to in the description.
Over to you, Raven.
Two stone pillars flank the Gulf of Aqaba in the Red Sea. Supposedly, they were erected by
King Solomon to commemorate the crossing of the Red Sea by the Hebrews after they were freed by
Moses. But are these pillars actual archaeological evidence of this biblical event? Let's get into it.
In 1978, Ron Wyatt, an American nurse anesthetist and amateur archaeologist who claimed to have made
over 100 biblical archaeological discoveries, found a red granite pillar at the Egyptian side
of the Gulf at Nuweiba. According to his report, it was found on its side in the water itself,
but today you can find it on the side of a road erected in concrete about 500 feet away from the
beach. Wyatt said that there was supposedly an inscription or there should have been an
inscription on this pillar that had since been eroded away, and he also said that it was of
Hebrew or Phoenician origin and dated to around 3,000 years old. I tried to look at this pillar
and date it off of the photos and biblical documentaries that are out there, but there
aren't really many very detailed high quality images of this pillar, so it's really difficult
to do so. I can't tell you how old it is with any confidence, but looking at the design of this
pillar, I don't know about you, but it looks very non-descript to me. That means it could be from
anywhere
or any time throughout history, to be honest, unless we get a closer look at it
and do some actual scientific research on it. The pillar doesn't have a capital, so
that also doesn't really help in its identification. And when I think of
Phoenician pillar, I think of this. Ron Wyatt himself did not do any scientific
studies on it, from what I've seen, because there are no peer-reviewed
papers out there to actually talk about any of his discoveries. So again, there's
nothing firmly documenting it anywhere saying that it was from 3,000 years ago
and it is of this design. In 1984, Wyatt claimed that he found a second pillar
directly opposite Nuweiba on the opposite side of the Gulf in Saudi
Arabia. It was apparently immediately removed by Saudi authorities, but it was
apparently inscribed with the following words on it.
Yahweh, Pharaoh, Mizraim, or Egypt, Moses, Death, Water, Solomon, and Edom. In what
context? Wyatt didn't say. He also didn't mention any fragments of words or other
words that maybe were, you know, connecting words or sentence words. And
he didn't mention, like, the placement of the words or what context. There's no
rubbing of the words or any photographic evidence of the words. So it all just
seems very convenient and keyword-themed. It's almost like he was doing SEO for a
pillar. There's an extra layer of convenience as well because it was a
mysterious pillar that was found and then it was swiftly taken away
immediately, only to have, like, a plaque in Saudi Arabia marking where it was. And
that's literally the only physical remains that we have, is this, like, little
commemorative plaque on the other side of the Red Sea. If Wyatt had taken any
sort of photos of the pillar or, again, inscriptions, anything like that, then we
could maybe talk about its legitimacy and a little bit more of the dating and
its connection to the one in Nuweiba. But until then, you know, it's one of those
things where the jury's out and you won't be able to convince me until I see
some hard scientific evidence. I also quickly want to point out that King
Solomon supposedly erected these pillars 400 years after the Red Sea crossing
apparently happened. Even if he did erect these pillars, that doesn't
actually mean that the crossing of the Red Sea happened. People erect religious
monuments all the time, and if it was so long after it happened, it doesn't
actually confirm that this event took place. What I do find interesting is that
Ron and his sons found and photographed supposed coral-encrusted chariot pieces
at the bottom of the Red Sea, as well as chariot wheels and bones belonging to
both humans and horses. Apparently some of the wood that they found had gold
gilding on it, but it was too deteriorated and fragile to actually be
removed from the water for any further scientific study. Images of these finds
were shown to Dr. Nassif Mohamed Hassan, the director of Egyptian antiquities at
the time, though whenever I google his name only biblical websites come up, so...
But Dr. Hassan claimed that one of the wheels was from the 18th dynasty,
apparently this is the only time that an eight-spoked wheel was used in ancient
Egypt, which does include the reign of Rameses II. I'm not an expert in
Egyptian chariots, so I can't tell you, like, how many spokes were used for the
wheels throughout all of Egyptian history, but I can show you an image of
Rameses II in a chariot when he was fighting the Hittites. Overall there's
just a lot of speculation and looking at something that could fit and making a
claim without any sort of scientific evidence to back you up. Also, I'm sorry,
you can't look at this coral formation and immediately claim that it's an
entire ancient set of chariot wheels still attached to its axle. All of the
overlays on these bits of coral supposedly marking out all of the spokes
on a wheel are just wild to me. I'm not an underwater archaeologist, but this
just looks... it just doesn't look right. Doesn't look right at all. Apparently a
human femur that Ron Wyatt found in the Red Sea was tested at Stockholm
University and it was determined that it came from a man about 165 to 170
centimeters tall, but from what I saw, there was no documentation stating
actually how old it was. So again, it could have just been... it can just be a
bone. It might have just been a bone that was in the sea from someone else at any
other point in history. Contrary to some beliefs, archaeology is in fact a science
and we don't make any conclusions unless there is irrefutable evidence that has
been checked multiple times by varying methods. So until there are proper
archaeological tests, surveys, excavations, to me the Pillar of Solomon will remain
simply a pillar in my eyes and all of the coral remains underneath the water
will simply be a rich, biodiverse home for sea life. So yeah, this all boils down
to how archaeology actually works in the real world. You can't just say, oh I found
this thing but oops I didn't take photos and now it's gone. Or I think these
fuzzy photos kind of look like wheels, but no expert has ever seemed bothered
to take a closer look at them. Even though the government of Egypt makes lots of
money off tourism and is usually more than willing to examine just about
anything if they think it is legitimate. So the bottom line is, major discoveries
are always reported in peer-reviewed journals so that other experts can chime
in and either debate things or verify things. They are not announced via
commercially made documentaries. This general principle can be applied to lots
more ridiculous claims that biblical literalists make, such as that this
structure in Turkey is Noah's Ark or that this statue is Joseph because it
comes from around the right time and place and the figure appears to be
wearing a multi-colored coat. But just because something seems to fit the
biblical narrative, it doesn't automatically mean that it does. Okay, so
when it comes to Moses and the Exodus story, there is currently no
archaeological evidence that points to a person like the Bible describes or an
event like the Bible describes. Now that doesn't mean that there was definitely
no Moses-like person. Probably the story is based on something. But it's safe to
assume that the biblical version of Moses and the Exodus is more literature
than it is literal history. But what about the three patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob? When it comes to them, there's a claim out there that goes far beyond
just finding their names etched into stones. In this case, some people believe
that we actually know their precise burial place. Muslims, in particular,
believe that at this site in Hebron, known as the Cave of the Patriarchs, lay
not only the actual bones of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob but of Adam and Eve as
well. I'll let the Useful Charts animator, Siawish Raymond, who also hosts the
Islamic History Channel, Al-Muqaddimah, explain. In 638 CE, the Holy Land came
under the control of the youngest of the three Abrahamic religions, Islam. The
Rashidun Caliphate, under Caliph Omar ibn al-Khattab, conquered cities like
Jerusalem, Gaza, and Hebron which marked the transfer of the biblical holy sites,
many of which are holy to Muslims, Jews, and Christians to Muslims. While the
Caliphate didn't persecute religious minorities and even protected many of
their sacred sites, such as the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, many other sites were
converted to the Islamic tradition and made into mosques. Among these newly
Islamized mosques was the Ibrahimi Mosque which was previously a Byzantine
era basilica enclosed in a Herodian era complex. This complex was built shortly
before the birth of Jesus on top of a cave known as the Cave of the Patriarchs.
It's called that because according to the traditions of Judaism, Christianity,
and Islam, this is where the patriarchs and their wives are buried. It's said that
the patriarch Abraham, known as Ibrahim in Islam, bought this cave when his wife
Sarah passed away. Then Abraham, his son Isaac, and Isaac's son Jacob were buried
along with their wives Sarah, Rebecca, and Leah respectively. According to some
sources, Adam and Eve are buried there as well. The complex that we see today was
built by King Herod the Great of Judea shortly before Jesus was born. However,
Josephus, who wrote so much about Herod's construction projects, doesn't give him
credit for the complex. In 2020, a paper was published that mentioned pottery
found at the site from multiple cities that dated as far back as the 8th
century BCE. This puts the site as a location that was visited by people
maybe from all over the Holy Land as far back as during the days of the Kingdom
of Judah. The Babylonian exile was still some two centuries in the future at this
point. What we know as Judaism today, which is in fact Rabbinic Judaism, didn't
exist in its current form at all. However, while the 8th century BCE is
quite far back, it's still around 1,000 years after Abraham is supposed to have
lived, which is around 1800 BCE or so. Now, according to the vast majority of
academic scholars, Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are purely mythological
characters and did not, in fact, exist. Since they didn't exist, their burial
sites didn't exist either. However, this didn't stop people from claiming to have
found bones down there. During the Islamic era, it was forbidden to go into
the caves below the complex as a form of respect for the patriarchs. However, there
was a brief period of around a century, the 12th century to be precise, when the
Holy Land was under Christian control, after the First Crusade. During this
period, the caves were more accessible and a monk claimed to have found bones
there. Although many sites around the world claim to be burial sites for
various biblical and Quranic figures, there are even multiple places claiming
to be the burial place of the same person. So, the whole thing isn't very
scientific. Okay, so it's safe to say that the traceable activity at the Cave of the
Patriarch site goes no further back than the Iron Age, even though it
supposedly contains the remains of people from the Bronze Age. So, unless
someone opens the tombs and tests the supposed bones in there, this site
cannot be used as evidence for the existence of any biblical character. And
the same goes for the plethora of other sites, most of which are Islamic, which
claim to hold the bones of other biblical characters, such as Abel, Noah,
and Moses. Okay, so I'm actually going to end this video on a positive note. That's
because there is one particular figure from the Bronze Age, for whom we have
lots of contemporary evidence for, that might actually be mentioned by name in
the Bible. So, this is not a central biblical character, but rather a foreign
figure that is maybe mentioned in passing in the biblical text. In fact,
it's a Bronze Age figure whose name is very well known, Hammurabi, King of
Babylon. So, obviously, for this last segment, I had to ask a seriologist, Dr.
Joshua Bowen, from the channel Digital Hammurabi, for his thoughts. In Genesis
14.1, we read, Now in the days of Amraphel, king of Shinar, Ariak, king of Elisar,
Kedor-la-Omer, king of Elam, and Tigal, king of Goyim. Who are these kings? Because
Shinar is known to be another name for the land of Babylonia in the Hebrew
Bible, this led scholars to look for a Babylonian king, with whom to identify
the first king, Amraphel. In the late 19th century, this king of Shinar was
identified as Hammurabi, assuming that the Akkadian form of his name had been
confused when brought into the Hebrew text. However, scholars later moved away
from this view. A significant development came with the publication of three
relatively late cuneiform texts that were likely copied from earlier texts
during the early 1st millennium BCE, known as the Spartoli tablets. These
texts described four kings who fought against the city of Babylon. In the late
19th century, Pinchas, the scholar who published the tablets, read the name of
one of the kings as Kedor-la-Hamal, or Kedor-la-Gamal, and made a connection
between this name and the Kedor-la-Omer of Genesis 14. This led to scholars
looking at the names of the other kings in the Spartoli tablets to see if they
could make other connections to those in Genesis 14. In the tablets, the king of
Babylonia was named Ibil-Tutu, and it was argued that this name referred to the
Babylonian usurper Marduk-apla-Idana. The name Marduk is written in Sumerian
Amar-Utu, and it was theorized that the writer of the biblical texts had at his
disposal a shortened form of Marduk-apla-Idana's name, which consisted of the
Amar of Amar-Utu, and Apal, thus Amar-Apal, which found its way into the Hebrew
text as Amraphel. Recently, in a monograph about the history of the city
of Babylon, Stephanie Dally presented the current opinions on this passage in an
appendix entitled Genesis 14 1 through 16 and possible links with foreign
rulers early in the reign of Hammurabi. There she notes that although scholars
abandoned the early notion that Genesis 14 referred to kings from the time of
Hammurabi, this has again come back to be a tenable position.
the name Amraphel, she writes, either Hammurabi with an unexplained suffix l or Amudpl, king of
Katna, with the common misreading of the letter r for d, possibly a confusion of the two names.
Although research in the last two decades, particularly from material from the time of
Hammurabi at the city of Mari, has moved scholars back toward identifying the Genesis 14 names,
including Amraphel, king of Shinar, with kings from the time of Hammurabi, it would appear that
we still do not possess enough information to draw definitive conclusions. Okay, so that's a
maybe and a very interesting one at that. If the Amraphel mentioned in Genesis 14 is in fact a
reference to the great king Hammurabi of Babylon, then that means that Hammurabi is the oldest known
historical figure mentioned by name in the Bible. And it also means that we have verification for at
least one Bronze Age person. Now, it actually makes sense that Hammurabi's name in particular
might have found its way into the Bible. According to critical scholars, Genesis 14 was most likely
written during the Babylonian captivity, which took place following 586 BCE. Being that Hammurabi
was one of the most famous Babylonian kings of all time, it's not hard to believe that the
Judahite scribes living in Babylon during the 500s might have heard about him and might have
decided to work him into their nation's origin story. So, the conclusion is still that there is
a huge difference when it comes to the Bronze Age parts of the Bible and the Iron Age parts.
The names of the main characters from the Iron Age section are relatively easy to find in the
archaeological record, whereas the names of the main characters from the Bronze Age section
are not. Likewise, the Iron Age parts contain lots of references to foreign individuals, who are known
to be real historical people, whereas the Bronze Age parts have, at best, just two references.
Okay, so that was a look at the Bible and the Bronze Age. Special thanks to all my fellow
YouTubers who helped with this video. I've placed links to all of their channels in the description
so if you're looking for some new channels to subscribe to, I suggest you check them out.
Thanks for watching!